because you need extra heat to grow
tomatoes out season it makes them more
expensive and that's one reason why the
vast majority of tomatoes we buy in the
UK have been imported from overseas
John Jones at guy and right in Harper
Chu supplies two of the biggest
supermarkets to get the best performance
from the throat and the plant we need to
give the plant everything that it needs
the right heat the right humidity
control the right fade in the slab so
your job your main job is to cater for
every single need of this tomato plant
that's it we nurture it turning up the
heating to simulate summer on this scale
costs a fortune as the price of fuel
Rockets John's Tomatoes might simply
become too expensive but he's come up
with an ingenious idea he's recycling
waste fruit and vege from large
wholesale markets and overripe imported
food what's wrong with these there's
nothing wrong with these
well those in particular ones that we've
just D boxed this week they actually
came from the docks and they were too
ripe
they were too ripe you see I don't think
they're really freaking it I'm staggered
by how much of this waste there is have
we gone completely bananas
[Music]
with all this it's hard to believe that
this is actual waste you know these have
come from overseas the Caribbean because
they're probably not just perfect throw
now I mean some of them aren't even ripe
yet look at these ones still green and
you open them up open that up and
there's nothing wrong with it whatsoever
it seems criminal if there's something
seriously wrong when we're wasting this
amount of food and it's not just bananas
but at least we can put them to some use
[Music]
Jonah's come up with a way to use this
wasted fruit and vege to heat these
glass houses saving a fortune in fuel
the bananas are tipped into this giant
hopper along with tons of other fruit
page that would otherwise go into
landfill and then mashed into a pulp
so this is where you make a great big
banana smoothie is it that's it the
liquid is held in here you all need a
spoonful of that with it and then pumped
into concrete tanks underground inside
the tanks trillions of bacteria feed on
the waste giving off lots of highly
flammable methane gas
Wow look at that looks like tar from
down there isn't it the methane gas is
burned to produce electricity which is
then used to heat all the glass houses
but burning the methane John is
producing a lot of carbon dioxide and
here's one of John's really clever ideas
tomatoes ripen much more quickly when
there's extra carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere so he pumps the waste gas
into the glass houses the plants absorb
the carbon dioxide and produce a lot
more Tomatoes so providing this market
climate how does it affect your
productivity we can achieve in a block
like this which is an acre almost 300
tonnes out of here and what would that
have been like say 40 years ago 60 70
really 60 or 70 that increased so I'm
really shocked to see the amount of
rejected fruit and veg which turns up
here every week but I suppose thanks to
John's ingenuity
it's not wasted
[Music]
you